docs: update service enrichment ADR (#3419)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/contributor/arch/030-service-attributes-enrichment.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1beta1
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ideally, Istio would follow the OTel conventions natively or provide configuration options to do so. Because this is not the case, we must compensate by actively modifying the data. Our OTel Collector configuration is the best place for this compensation, because it already processes Istio spans and access logs. Thus, we should modify the default Istio service attributes enrichment to ensure uniform enrichment logic across all telemetry data, according to OTel conventions.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach uses existing Istio-specific attributes to identify its spans. See the following example of an Istio-generated trace span's attributes:
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the spans are identified, we use an OTel transform processor to drop the **service.name** attribute from them. This processor runs before the `k8sattributes` processor, which then correctly enriches the spans. See example below:
```

2. Using Istio-specific attributes that are already set on the span

> [!NOTE]

> > An issue was raised in the Istio repository to add OTel-compliant service attribute enrichment: https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/58803. This was resolved via [istio/api#3653](https://github.com/istio/api/pull/3653) and [istio/istio#59207](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/59207), introducing the `serviceAttributeEnrichment: OTEL_SEMANTIC_CONVENTIONS` field under `meshConfig.extensionProviders[].opentelemetry`. Once the Kyma Istio module adopts this change, the `transform/drop-istio-service-name` OTTL transform processor workaround becomes obsolete and can be removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> An issue was raised in the Istio repository to add OTel-compliant service attribute enrichment: https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/58803. This was resolved with [istio/api#3653](https://github.com/istio/api/pull/3653) and [istio/istio#59207](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/59207), introducing the `serviceAttributeEnrichment: OTEL_SEMANTIC_CONVENTIONS` field under `meshConfig.extensionProviders[].opentelemetry`. As soon as the Kyma Istio module adopts this change, the `transform/drop-istio-service-name` OTTL transform processor workaround becomes obsolete and we can remove it.
```

### Second Challenge: Incrementally Introducing This Breaking Change

> To minimize disruption to existing users, we roll out the migration from the custom `servicenameenrichment` processor to the standard OTel `k8sattributes` processor in four phases. This approach ensures backward compatibility and gives users time to adapt to the new behavior.

Reviewer: To avoid having to update the number, avoid mentioning the number :D

```suggestion
To minimize disruption to existing users, we roll out the migration from the custom `servicenameenrichment` processor to the standard OTel `k8sattributes` processor in several phases. This approach ensures backward compatibility and gives users time to adapt to the new behavior.
```

Author: smart 🧠

  - **Phase 1**: Uses `servicenameenrichment` processor (legacy behavior)
  - **Phase 2**: Uses `servicenameenrichment` processor (legacy behavior); new default Telemetry CRs have the annotation set to `otel`
  - **Phase 3**: Uses `k8sattributes` processor (new behavior)
  - **Phase 4**: Annotation support removed; always uses `k8sattributes` processor
- **`otel`**: Explicitly use the standard OTel `k8sattributes` processor
- **`kyma-legacy`**: Explicitly use our legacy custom `servicenameenrichment` processor

This mechanism manages the transition at the cluster level, uniformly affecting all telemetry pipelines and preserving backward compatibility for existing deployments.

#### Phase 1: Introduce New Enrichment Logic

In this initial phase, we introduce the new enrichment logic and the annotation-based selection mechanism. We implement the `transform/drop-istio-service-name` OTTL transform processor, configure `k8sattributes` to enrich service attributes, and introduce the `telemetry.kyma-project.io/service-enrichment` annotation on the Telemetry CR.

**Deliverables:**

> - Implement the custom transform processor that drops Istio trace spans' `service.name` enrichment attribute (identified by `component="proxy"`)

Reviewer: not quite sure I understood this correctly:

```suggestion
- Implement the custom transform processor that drops the `service.name` enrichment attribute (identified by `component="proxy"`) from the Istio trace spans.
```

Author: Istio enriches these trace span's `service.name` attribute with values that we don't want (i.e. they don't follow OTel's conventions), so we just implemented a transform processor that removes that enrichment before we add our OTel-compatible one.

They have now solved the problem, but it's not released yet, so we still have to keep this workaround for a while.

- Configure the `k8sattributes` processor to enrich service attributes
- Implement the `telemetry.kyma-project.io/service-enrichment` annotation for switching between the legacy `servicenameenrichment` processor and the new logic

**Default Behavior:**
- **New Telemetry resources**: Annotation set to `otel` (uses new processor).
- **Existing Telemetry resources (annotation unset)**: Use `servicenameenrichment` processor (preserves existing behavior).

> [!NOTE]
> The Kyma Lifecycle Manager (KLM) applies the default Telemetry CR only once during module enablement. Subsequent module upgrades do not overwrite existing Telemetry resources, preserving custom configurations and annotations. As an edge case, if users manually delete the Telemetry CR, KLM reapplies the default configuration on the next reconciliation. This behavior will be addressed in future improvements.

**User Action (Optional):**

> To adopt the new processor proactively, users can set the annotation manually, which also removes any warning condition in the Telemetry CR status:

Reviewer: really? With this annotation, any (also unrelated) warnings are removed from the Telemetry CR status? Or are there no warnings unrelated to the service attributes feature?

Author: No.
So, we will add a warning in phase 2, marking the deprecation of the old service enrichment logic. If users set this annotation, they explicitly set the service enrichment logic to the new one => the warning disappears.

Author: There's a mistake in this paragraph. No warning will be added in phase 1. Sorry for the confusion, I will rewrite this sentence.

Author: Done, moved this whole section to the next phase (phase 2), since phase 1 is now already implemented and it does not change anything in the Telemetry resources themselves (both existing and new). That was the main point of updating this ADR.

```yaml

> apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1beat1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1beta1
```

Author: 🎧🥁🔊

  # ...
```

#### Phase 2: New Clusters Use New Logic

In this phase, we update the default Telemetry CR so that newly created resources have the annotation set to `otel` by default. Existing resources with the annotation unset continue using the legacy `servicenameenrichment` processor.

**Deliverables:**
- Configure the default Telemetry CR so that newly created resources have the annotation set to `otel`.
- Add a warning banner to Kyma Dashboard that alerts users about the future deprecation when the annotation is not set to `otel`.
- Document the deprecation process.
- Implement a custom metric that reflects the feature adoption rate.
- Update dashboards to track the new metric.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

**Monitoring Adoption**
To track the adoption of the new processor during phases 2 and 3, the Telemetry Manager exports a new metric:

```

...and add the rest of the content, including the existing Go code block, explanatory text, and PromQL examples here.

- **Existing Telemetry resources (annotation unset)**: Use `servicenameenrichment` processor (preserves existing behavior).

#### Monitoring Adoption Rates

To track the adoption of the new processor during phases 2 and 3, the Telemetry Manager must export a new metric:

```go
ServiceEnrichmentProcessorUsage = promauto.With(registry).NewGaugeVec(
    prometheus.GaugeOpts{
        Namespace: "telemetry",
        Name:      "service_enrichment_processor_usage",
        Help:      "Service enrichment processor type in use by Telemetry resources",
    },
    []string{"processor_type"},
)
```

With this metric, we can monitor adoption progress and identify clusters that need support during the transition.

We can use dashboards to visualize the data, and run queries such as the following:

```promql
# Count Telemetry resources using a specific processor type
count(telemetry_service_enrichment_processor_usage{processor_type="otel"})
count(telemetry_service_enrichment_processor_usage{processor_type="kyma-legacy"})
count(telemetry_service_enrichment_processor_usage{processor_type="unset"})
```

#### Phase 3: Deprecation with Backward Compatibility

> In this phase, the default behavior changes: resources with unset annotations now use the `k8sattributes` processor. However, users that need more time for migration can still explicitly choose the legacy `servicenameenrichment` processor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this phase, the default behavior changes: resources with unset annotations now use the `k8sattributes` processor. However, users that need more time for migration can still explicitly choose the legacy `servicenameenrichment` processor.

To monitor clusters that still use the legacy processor, we continue using the `telemetry_service_enrichment_processor_usage` metric introduced in phase 2.
```

  # ...
```

#### Phase 2: New Clusters Use New Logic

In this phase, we update the default Telemetry CR so that newly created resources have the annotation set to `otel` by default. Existing resources with the annotation unset continue using the legacy `servicenameenrichment` processor.

**Deliverables:**
- Configure the default Telemetry CR so that newly created resources have the annotation set to `otel`.
- Add a warning banner to Kyma Dashboard that alerts users about the future deprecation when the annotation is not set to `otel`.
- Document the deprecation process.
- Implement a custom metric that reflects the feature adoption rate.
- Update dashboards to track the new metric.

**Default Behavior:**
- **New Telemetry resources**: Annotation set to `otel` (uses new processor).
- **Existing Telemetry resources (annotation unset)**: Use `servicenameenrichment` processor (preserves existing behavior).

> **Monitoring Adoption**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Monitoring Adoption:**
```

  # ...
```

#### Phase 2: New Clusters Use New Logic

> In this phase, the default Telemetry CR is updated so that newly created resources have the annotation set to `otel` by default. Existing resources with the annotation unset continue using the legacy `servicenameenrichment` processor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this phase, we update the default Telemetry CR so that newly created resources have the annotation set to `otel` by default. Existing resources with the annotation unset continue using the legacy `servicenameenrichment` processor.
```

**Deliverables:**
- Configure the default Telemetry CR so that newly created resources have the annotation set to `otel`

> - Add a warning banner to Kyma Dashboard when the annotation is not present with the new value, warning users about the future deprecation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add a warning banner to Kyma Dashboard that alerts users about the future deprecation when the annotation is not set to `otel`.
```

- Document the deprecation process
- Implement a custom metric that reflects the feature adoption rate
- Update dashboards to track the new metric

> #### Monitoring Adoption Rates

Reviewer: This is also a h4 headline like the phases, but it's not a phase. 

If this belongs under the Phase 2 umbrella, it should be a h5 headline, or (like "Deliverables" in line 145), bold font.

```suggestion
**Monitoring Adoption Rates:**
```

Author: It's part of both phase 2 and 3, this is why I thought of it as being on the same level as the phases themselves.

Reviewer: I see. I argue this means that introducing the new metric ispart of phase 2 (I'd insert it around line 150). 
And in phase 3 (around line 183), we mention that we keep using it.

  # ...
```

#### Phase 4: Cleanup

In the final phase, we remove the annotation-based selection mechanism and all related legacy code. This phase requires a 3-month deprecation notice upfront.

**Deliverables:**
- Change the default behavior to always use the new enrichment logic
- Remove unused configuration, code, and monitoring metric (for example, reconcilers, config builders)

> - Delete `service_name` end-to-end tests and adapt `service_enrichment` tests according to the comments

Reviewer: Not sure which comments you mean; here's my best guess:

```suggestion
- Delete `service_name` end-to-end tests and adapt `service_enrichment` tests to use the new processor.
```

Author: These are actual e2e tests that need to be removed/adjusted. There are actual comments in the code that describe what should be done. I just wanted to highlight that in the ADR here.

See, for example:
https://github.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/blob/main/test/e2e/metrics/agent/service_enrichment_test.go#L100

Reviewer: How about something like this:

```suggestion
- Remove the `service_name` end-to-end tests for the legacy processor. Adapt the `service_enrichment` tests to validate `k8sattributes` processor behavior exclusively, as indicated by inline code comments in the test source files.
```

> - Archive and remove the `servicenameenrichment` processor from OCC

Reviewer: What is OCC? just guessing:

```suggestion
- Archive and remove the `servicenameenrichment` processor from the OCC (OpenTelemetry Collector Contrib) repository.
```

Author: OpenTelemetry Collector Components (our repo). I will edit it
https://github.com/kyma-project/opentelemetry-collector-components

Author: Done

> - Delete the deprecation process documentation

Reviewer: Not sure what that means. What exactly are we going to delete?

Author: We don't need to mention that the old service enrichment logic is deprecated and that we recommend the new one, and so on. Since there won't be any optional service enrichment logic at this phase. Just the default one (the new one).

Reviewer: then how about this:

```suggestion
- Update user documentation to remove all information related to the phased migration, such as deprecation notices and the `kyma-legacy` option.
```

**Default Behavior:**
- **All Telemetry resources**: Use OTel's `k8sattributes` processor exclusively.
- **Annotation removal**: The `telemetry.kyma-project.io/service-enrichment` annotation is no longer supported.

This phase marks the completion of the migration to standards-compliant OTel attribute enrichment.

## Decision

> We will migrate from the custom `servicenameenrichment` processor to the OTel-native `k8sattributes` processor to align with OpenTelemetry conventions for service attribute enrichment across all telemetry types (traces, metrics, and logs). To handle Istio-generated trace spans that are pre-enriched by Istio's MeshConfig, we will use an OTel transform processor to remove the `service.name` attribute from spans identified by `component="proxy"` before applying the `k8sattributes` processor, ensuring consistent enrichment logic. The `transform/drop-istio-service-name` OTTL transform processor workaround must be kept until the Kyma Istio module adopts the `serviceAttributeEnrichment: OTEL_SEMANTIC_CONVENTIONS` field introduced in [istio/api#3653](https://github.com/istio/api/pull/3653) and [istio/istio#59207](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/59207). Once adopted, this first challenge becomes obsolete, meaning the OTTL transform processor workaround can be removed and istio's `meshConfig` adapted accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will migrate from the custom `servicenameenrichment` processor to the OTel-native `k8sattributes` processor to align with OpenTelemetry conventions for service attribute enrichment across all telemetry types (traces, metrics, and logs). To handle Istio-generated trace spans that are pre-enriched by Istio's MeshConfig, we will use an OTel transform processor to remove the `service.name` attribute from spans identified by `component="proxy"`. This action occurs before the `k8sattributes` processor runs, which ensures consistent enrichment logic.

Until the Kyma Istio module adopts the `serviceAttributeEnrichment: OTEL_SEMANTIC_CONVENTIONS` field introduced in [istio/api#3653](https://github.com/istio/api/pull/3653) and [istio/istio#59207](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/59207), we must keep the `transform/drop-istio-service-name` OTTL transform processor workaround. When the Kyma Istio module adopts this change, the workaround is no longer needed. We can then remove the OTTL transform processor and adapt Istio's `meshConfig`.
```
